---
layout: post
title:  "Big or Little Endian"
date:   2015-09-18
time:   "16:50:00"
categories: ["week-ary", "work", "idl", "python"]
---

This has been a difficult problem to solve.  Thankfully I asked about it on time.
I'm working with solar images observed by a ground-based telescope in US.
For a while I've been thinking there was something wrong with the data, for a
start my images didn't look like the ones that appeared in papers, mine looked
saturated on certain areas.

!image 1 vs 2

I went over this few times, and my first attempt is to look at the histogram, just
to get an idea of the distribution of the data (and be able to choose a sensible
min and max to plot).  The histogram looked weird too... too discrete... Oh yes,
they are integers - fair enough... but why are there negative numbers?

!histogram

Last week, while telling to my colleague how the image and the histogram look,
also for a small portion of the image...

!image histogram_small

I got an idea, the numbers are overfloating, look at the begining of the histogram,
looks like it should be the tail. So, I started to move the negative to the positive
by just:

```python

```
!image b,s + histograms

... but still, it didn't look right. Some places look better, so for sure it was not
saturated. However, other parts were still looking wrong, as it some limb
darkening correction was applied inversely.

Then I asked for help to the people of the telescope... and I got a very enlighten
replied: "Depending on the OS you might have to first do a /Byteorder/".

The [IDL docummentation about it][idl_byteorder] didn't helped much to make me
understand, but [Coyote's explanation][coyote_byteorder] helped much more.
However, it confused me when it said:
"Most UNIX machines are big endian. Whereas most PCs are little endian machines."
Thankfully, the test shown on its page showed me that our "linux" servers at work
are little and not big.

So, what does this mean? It seems that some machines stores a two byte integer number
in a different way than others (why? who knows!). So for example:
10405 in binary is:

 00101000 10100101 for a little endian machine (as if you would have written it by hand)
 10100101 00101000 for a big endian one.

I don't really know yet - and haven't come up with a way to check it is the following
statement:
> Big endian machines store a two-byte integer with its most significant byte first, followed by it least significant byte.

Does this mean that just that in the case above, we put first the larger one? so, if we
convert the numbers to decimal:

```python


```
# wolfram alpha
http://www.wolframalpha.com/input/?i=10100101b+to+decimal

00101000 = 40
10100101 = 165

 165 - 40 for big endian
 40 - 165 for little endian

Is that right?

Well, in any case, the command to solve this in IDL is:
```IDL

; network(host) refers to Big(little) endians
```

and in [numpy][numpy_byteorder]:
```python

```

So, comming back to my original image and histogram, here is how they look now:

!image b,s + histogram

Something new learned this week!

[Idl_byteorder]: http://www.exelisvis.com/docs/BYTEORDER.html
[coyote_byteorder]: http://www.idlcoyote.com/tips/endian_machines.html
[numpy_byteorder]: http://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/user/basics.byteswapping.html
